Add Part 3 of the “Conda Is Not PyPI” series (#252)
conda/conda-dot-org: blog/2025-11-11-conda-practical-power.mdx

---
title: "Practical Power: Reproducibility, Automation, and Layering with Conda"
slug: "conda-practical-power"
authors: [dbast,jezdez]
tags: [conda, reproducibility, automation, distribution]
description: "Part 3 of the 'Conda Is Not PyPI' series: how conda enables reproducibility, automation, layered workflows, and rolling distribution."
---

*Part 3 of our series "Conda Is Not PyPI: Understanding Conda as a User-Space Distribution".*

In [Part 1](https://conda.org/blog/conda-is-not-pypi/), we explained why conda is not just another Python package manager.

> In [Part 2](https://conda.org/blog/conda-pip-docker-nix/), we placed conda in the broader packaging spectrum, showing how it differs from pip, Docker, and Nix.

Author: thanks. done in https://github.com/conda/conda-dot-org/pull/252/commits/9f11ccbbd4e481f16dc856855cac16021933b3fd

---

## Conda as a rolling distribution: continuous evolution with stability

Most operating system distributions (Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora) use a fixed-version model: each release has a defined lifecycle, and packages within that version remain largely unchanged (except for security patches). This provides stability but means users must perform major version upgrades to get newer software.

Conda takes a fundamentally different approach: it functions as a **rolling distribution** across all platforms (Linux, macOS, Windows) with constantly updated binary packages. New versions of libraries are released continuously, and the entire ecosystem evolves without waiting for major version releases.

:::note[Two distribution models]
**Fixed-release** (like Ubuntu 24.04): stable but requires major upgrades to stay current. **Rolling**: fresh and up-to-date but unpredictable without tooling. **Conda combines both**: lockfiles ensure predictability while migration infrastructure keeps the entire ecosystem current and safe.
:::

> **The magic: migration infrastructure.** When a new, binary-incompatible version of a core library (like rebuilding everything depending on OpenSSL once v4.0.0 comes out in April 2026) is released, conda's infrastructure automatically rebuilds all dependent packages in the correct order. This creates a gradual transition through the entire dependency graph by replacing one "plank" at a time. As one community member describes it, an "[ultimate Ship of Theseus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ship_of_Theseus)," where bots constantly rebuild related packages, one dependency at a time. At scale, conda-forge, the largest community channel, manages 10+ simultaneous migrations across its 26,000+ packages, making this orchestration industrial in scope.

Reviewer: I held back from commenting to iterate once more one a minor inaccuracy I had left in (to avoid that "10+ migrations" sounds like individual PRs, rather than full-fledged subgraphs of the web of dependencies), but once I saw you updated it yourself, I'm permitting myself one more comment 😅 

If we're naming conda-forge specifically, I'd increase the number back to 20+ (I lowered it because I didn't know the numbers for Anaconda), and at that point one could also consider linking to the conda-forge [status page](https://conda-forge.org/status/), which shows all the live migrators.

```suggestion
**The magic: migration infrastructure.** When a new, binary-incompatible version of a core library (like rebuilding everything depending on OpenSSL once v4.0.0 comes out in April 2026) is released, conda's infrastructure automatically rebuilds all dependent packages in the correct order. This creates a gradual transition through the entire dependency graph by replacing one "plank" at a time. As one community member describes it, an "[ultimate Ship of Theseus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ship_of_Theseus)," where bots constantly rebuild related packages, one dependency at a time. At scale, conda-forge, the largest community channel, manages 20+ independent migrations across its 26,000+ packages at [any given time](https://conda-forge.org/status/), making this orchestration industrial in scope.
```
